###Glosary

__1/f noise__ A fundamental noise in resistive devices arising from fluctuating conductivity. Same as pink noise.

__2’s complement__ (see two’s complement).

__60 Hz noise__ An added noise from electromagnetic fields caused by either magnetic field induction or capacitive coupling.

__accumulator__ High-speed memory located in the processor used to perform arithmetic or logical functions. The accumulators on the Arm Cortex M are Register R0 through R12.

__accuracy__ A measure of how close our instrument measures the desired parameter referred to the NIST.

__acknowledge__ Clearing the interrupt flag bit that requested the interrupt.

__active thread__  A thread that is in the ready-to-run circular linked list. It is either running or is ready to run.

actuator Electro-mechanical or electro-chemical device that allows computer commands to affect the external world.

ADC  Analog to digital converter, an electronic device that converts analog signals (e.g., voltage) into digital form (i.e., integers).

address bus A set of digital signals that connect the CPU, memory and I/O devices, specifying the location to read or write for each bus cycle.  See also control bus and data bus.

address decoder  A digital circuit having the address lines as input and a select line as output (see select signal)

aging  A technique used in priority schedulers that temporarily increases the priority of low priority treads so they are run occasionally. (See starvation)

aliasing When digital values sampled at fs contain frequency components above ½ fs, then the apparent frequency of the data is shifted into the 0 to ½ fs range. See Nyquist Theory.

alternatives The total number of possibilities. E.g., an 8-bit number scheme can represent 256 different numbers.  An 8-bit digital to analog converter (DAC) can generate 256 different analog outputs.

anode The positive side of a diode. Current enters the anode side of a diode. Contrast with cathode.

answer modem The device that receives the telephone call.

anti-reset-windup Establishing an upper bound on the magnitude of the integral term in a PID controller, so this term will not dominate, when the errors are large.

arithmetic logic unit (ALU) Component of the processor that performs arithmetic and logic operations.

arm Activate so that interrupts are requested. Trigger flags that can request interrupts will have a corresponding arm bit to allow or disallow that flag to request interrupts. Contrast to enable.

armature  The moving structure in a relay, the part that moves when the relay is activated. Contrast to frame.

ASCII American Standard Code for Information Interchange, a code for representing characters, symbols, and synchronization messages as 7 bit, 8-bit or 16-bit binary values.

assembler  System software that converts an assembly language program (human readable format) into object code  (machine readable format).

assembly directive Operations included in the program that are not executed by the computer at run time, but rather are interpreted by the assembler during the assembly process. Same as pseudo-op.

assembly listing Information generated by the assembler in human readable format, typically showing the object code, the original source code, assembly errors, and the symbol table.

asynchronous bus A communication protocol without a central clock where is the data is transferred using two or three control lines implementing a handshaked interaction between the memory and the computer.

asynchronous communications interface adapter (ACIA) Device to transmit data with asynchronous serial communication protocol. Same as UART and SCI.

asynchronous protocol A protocol where the two devices have separate and distinct clocks

atomic  Software execution that cannot be divided or interrupted. Once started, an atomic operation will run to its completion without interruption. On most computers the assembly language instructions are atomic. All instructions on the ARM® Cortex™-M processor are atomic except store and load multiple, STM LDM.

autoinitialization The process of automatically reloading the address registers and block size counters at the end of a previous block transfer, so that DMA transfer can occur indefinitely without software interaction.

availability The portion of the total time that the system is working. MTBF is the mean time between failures, MTTR is the mean time to repair, and availability is MTBF/(MTBF+MTTR).

bandwidth  In communication systems, the information transfer rate, the amount of data transferred per second. Same as throughput. In analog circuits, the frequency at which the gain drops to 0.707 of the normal value. For a low pass system, the frequency response ranges from 0 to a maximum value.  For a high pass system, the frequency response ranges from a minimum value to infinity. For a bandpass system, the frequency response ranges from a minimum to a maximum value. Compare to frequency response.

bandwidth coupling Module A is connected to Module B, because data flows from A to B.

bang-bang A control system where the actuator has only two states, and the system “bangs” all the way in one direction or “bangs” all the way in the other, same as binary controller.

bank-switched memory A memory module with two banks that interfaces to two separate address/data buses. At any given time one memory bank is attached to one address/data bus the other bank is attached to the other bus, but this attachment can be switched.

basis  Subset from which linear combinations can be used to reconstruct the entire set.

baud rate In general, the baud rate is the total number of bits (information, overhead, and idle) per time that are transmitted. In a modem application it is the total number of sounds per time are transmitted

bi-directional Digital signals that can be either input or output.

biendian The ability to process numbers in both big and little-endian formats.

big endian Mechanism for storing multiple byte numbers such that the most significant byte exists first (in the smallest memory address).  See also little endian.

binary A system that has two states, on and off.

binary controller Same as bang-bang.

binary recursion A recursive technique that makes two calls to itself during the execution of the function. See also recursion, linear recursion, and tail recursion.

binary semaphore  A semaphore that can have two values. The value=1 means OK and the value=0 means busy. Compare to counting semaphore.

bipolar transistor Either a NPN or PNP transistor.

bipolar stepper motor A stepper motor where the current flows in both directions (in/out) along the interface wires; a stepper with four interface wires. Contrast to unipolar stepper motor.

bit Basic unit of digital information taking on the value of either 0 or 1.

bit rate The information transfer rate, given in bits per second. Same as bandwidth and throughput.

bit time The basic unit of time used in serial communication. With serial channel bit time is 1/baud rate.

blind-cycle  A software/hardware synchronization method where the software waits a specified amount of time for the hardware operation to complete. The software has no direct information (blind) about the status of the hardware.

block correction code (BCC) A code (e.g., horizontal parity) attached to the end of a message used to detect and correct transmission errors.

blocked thread  A thread that is not scheduled for running because it is waiting on an external event.

blocking semaphore  A semaphore where the threads will block (so other threads can perform useful functions) when they execute wait on a busy semaphore. Contrast to spinlock semaphore.

Board Support Package (BSP) A set of software routines that abstract the I/O hardware such that the same high-level code can run on multiple computers.

borrow During subtraction, if the difference is too small, then we use a borrow to pass the excess information into the next higher place. For example, in decimal subtraction 36-27 requires a borrow from the ones to tens place because 6-7 is too small to fit into the 0 to 9 range of decimal numbers.

bounded waiting The condition where once a thread begins to wait on a resource, there are a finite number of threads that will be allowed to proceed before this thread is allowed to proceed.

break-before-make In a double-throw relay or double-throw switch, there is one common contact and two separate contacts. Break-before-make means as the common contact moves from one of separate contacts to another, it will break off (finish bouncing and no longer touch) the first contact before it makes (begins to bounce and starts to touch) the other contact. A form C relay has a break-before-make operation.

break or trap  A break or a trap is a debugging instrument that halts the processor. With a resident debugger, the break is created by replacing specific op code with a software interrupt instruction. When encountered it will stop your program and jump into the debugger. Therefore, a break halts the software.  The condition of being in this state is also referred to as a break.

breakdown A transducer that stops functioning when its input goes above a maximum value or below a minimum value. Contrast to dead zone.

breakpoint  The place where a break is inserted, the time when a break is encountered, or the time period when a break is active.

brushed DC motor  A motor where the current reversals are produced with brushes between the stator and rotor. They are less expensive than brushless DC motors.

brushless DC motor (BLDC) A motor where the current reversals are produced with shaft sensors and an electronic controller. They are faster and more reliable than brushed DC motors.

buffered I/O  A FIFO queue is placed in between the hardware and software in an attempt to increase bandwidth by allowing both hardware and software to run in parallel.

burn The process of programming a ROM, PROM or EEPROM.

burst DMA An I/O synchronization scheme that transfers an entire block of data all at once directly from an input device into memory, or directly from memory to an output device.

bus A set of digital signals that connect the CPU, memory and I/O devices, consisting of address signals, data signals and control signals. See also address bus, control bus and data bus.

bus bandwidth The number of bytes transferred per second between the processor and memory.

bus interface unit (BIU) Component of the processor that reads and writes data from the bus.  The BIU drives the address and control buses.

busy-wait synchronization  A software/hardware synchronization method where the software continuously reads the hardware status waiting for the hardware operation to complete. The software usually performs no work while waiting for the hardware. Same as gadfly.

byte Digital information containing eight bits.

carrier frequency  the average or midvalue sound frequency in the modem.

carry During addition, if the sum is too large, then we use a carry to pass the excess information into the next higher place. For example, in decimal addition 36+27 requires a carry from the ones to tens place because 6+7 is too big to fit into the 0 to 9 range of decimal numbers.

cathode The negative side of a diode. Current exits the cathode side of a diode. Contrast to anode.

cathode ray tube (CRT) terminal An I/O device used to input data from a keyboard and output character data to a screen. The electrical interface is usually asynchronous serial.

causal The property where the output depends on the present and past inputs, but not on any future inputs.

ceiling Establishing an upper bound on the result of an operation. See also floor.

certification A process where a governing body (e.g., FDA, NASA, FCC, DOD etc.) gives approval for the use of the device. It usually involves demonstrating the device meets or exceeds safety and performance criteria.

channel The hardware that allows communication to occur.

checksum The simple sum of the data, usually in finite precision (e.g., 8, 16, 24 bits).

closed-loop control system A control system that includes sensors to measure the current state variables. These inputs are used to drive the system to the desired state.

CMOS A digital logic system called complementary metal oxide semiconductor. It has properties of low power and small size. Its power is a function of the number of transitions per second. Its speed is often limited by capacitive loading.

cohesion A cohesive module is one such that all parts of the module are related to each other to satisfy a common objective.

command signals The lines that specify general information about the current cycle; signals that specify whether or not to activate during this cycle; the specific times for the rise and fall edges are uncertain. Contrast to timing signals.

common anode LED display  A display with multiple LEDs, configured with all of the LED anodes connected together, there are separate connections to the cathodes (current flows in the common anode and out the individual cathodes).

common cathode LED display  A display with multiple LEDs, configured with all of the LED cathodes connected together, there are separate connections to the anodes (current flows in the individual anodes and out the common cathode).

common mode For a system with differential inputs, the common mode properties are defined as signals applied to both inputs simultaneously.  Contrast to differential mode.

common mode input impedance Common mode input voltage divided by common mode input current.

common mode rejection ratio For a differential amplifier, CMRR is the ratio of the common mode gain divided by the differential mode gain. A perfect CMRR would be zero.

compiler System software that converts a high-level language program (human readable format) into object code  (machine readable format).

complex instruction set computer (CISC) A computer with many instructions, instructions that have varying lengths, instructions that execute in varying times, many instructions can access memory, one instruction may both read and write memory, fewer and more specialized registers, and many different types of addressing modes. Contrast to RISC.

compression ratio The ratio of the number of original bytes to the number of compressed bytes.

concurrent programming A software system that supports two tasks to be active at the same time. A computer with interrupts implements concurrent programming.

condition code register (CCR) Register in the processor that contains the status of the previous ALU operation, as well as some operating mode flags such as the interrupt enable bit.

control bus A set of digital signals that connect the CPU, memory and I/O devices, specifying when to read or write for each bus cycle.  See also address bus and data bus.

control coupling Module A is connected to Module B, because actions in A affect the control path in B.

control unit (CU) Component of the processor that determines the sequence of operations.

cooperative multi-tasking  A scheduler that cannot suspend execution of a thread without the thread's permission. The thread must cooperate and suspend itself. Same as nonpreemptive scheduler.

counting semaphore  A semaphore that can have any signed integer value. The value>0  means OK and the value≤0 means busy. Compare to binary semaphore.

CPU bound  A situation where the input or output device is faster than the software. In other words it takes less time for the I/O device to process data, than for the software to process data. Contrast to I/O bound.

CPU cycle A memory bus cycle where the address and R/W are controlled by the processor. On microcontrollers without DMA, all cycles are CPU cycles. Contrast to DMA cycle.

crisp input An input parameter to the fuzzy logic system, usually with units like cm, cm/sec, °C etc.

crisp output An output parameter from the fuzzy logic system, usually with units like dynes, watts etc.

critical section  Locations within a software module, which if an interrupt were to occur at one of these locations, then an error could occur (e.g., data lost, corrupted data, program crash, etc.)  Same as vulnerable window.

cross-assembler  An assembler that runs on one computer but creates object code for a different computer.

cross-compiler A compiler that runs on one computer but creates object code for a different computer.

cycle steal DMA An I/O synchronization scheme that transfers data one item at a time directly from an input device into memory, or directly from memory to an output device. Same as single cycle DMA.

cycle stretch The action where some memory cycles are longer allowing time for communication with slower memories, sometimes the memory itself requests the additional time and sometimes the computer has a preprogrammed cycle stretch for certain memory addresses

DAC  Digital to analog converter, an electronic device that converts digital signals (i.e., integers) to analog form (e.g., voltage).

data acquisition system A system that collects information, same as instrument.

data bus A set of digital signals that connect the CPU, memory and I/O devices, specifying the value that is being read or written for each bus cycle.  See also address bus and control bus.

data communication equipment (DCE) A modem or printer connected a serial communication network.

data terminal equipment (DTE) A computer or a terminal connected a serial communication network.

dead zone  A condition of a transducer when a large change in the input causes little or no change in the output. Contrast to breakdown.

deadlock  A scenario that occurs when two or more threads are all blocked each waiting for the other with no hope of recovery.

defuzzification Conversion from the fuzzy logic output variables to the crisp outputs.

desk checking or dry run  We perform a desk check (or dry run) by determining in advance, either by analytical algorithm or explicit calculations, the expected outputs of strategic intermediate stages and final results for a set of typical inputs. We then run our program can compare the actual outputs with this template of expected results.

device driver  A collection of software routines that perform I/O functions.

differential mode For a system with differential inputs, the differential mode properties are defined as signals applied as a difference between the two inputs.  Contrast to common mode.

differential mode input impedance Differential mode input voltage divided by differential mode input current.

digital signal processing Processing of data with digital hardware or software after the signal has been sampled by the ADC, e.g., filters, detection and compression/decompression.

direct memory access (DMA) the ability to transfer data between two modules on the bus, this transfer is usually initiated by the hardware (device needs service) and the software configures the communication, but the data is transferred without explicit software action for each piece of data

direction register Specifies whether a bi-directional I/O pin is an input or an output. We set a direction register bit to 0 (or 1) to specify the corresponding I/O pin to be input (or output.)

disarm Deactivate so that interrupts are not requested, performed by clearing the arm bit.

Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) A technique to convert data in the time domain to data in the frequency domain. N data points are sampled at fs. The resulting frequency resolution is fs /N.

DMA  Direct Memory Access is a software/hardware synchronization method where the hardware itself causes a data transfer between the I/O device and memory at the appropriate time when data needs to be transferred. The software usually can perform other work while waiting for the hardware. No software action is required for each individual byte.

DMA cycle A memory bus cycle where the address and R/W are controlled by the DMA controller. Contrast to CPU cycle.

double byte  Two bytes containing 16 bits. Same as halfword.

double-pole relay Two separate and complete relays, which are activated together. Contrast to single pole.

double-pole switch Two separate and complete switches. The two switches are electrically separate, but mechanically connected. Such that both switches are activated together. Contrast to single pole.

double-throw relay A relay with three contact connections, one common and two throws. The common will be connected to exactly of one the two throws (see single-throw).

double-throw switch A switch with three contact connections. The center contact will be connected exactly one of the other two contacts.  Contrast with single-throw.

double word  Two words containing 64 bits.

download The process of transferring object code from the host (e.g., the PC) to the target microcontroller.

drop-out An error that occurs after a right shift or a divide, and the consequence is that an intermediate result loses its ability to represent all of the values. E.g., I=100*(N/51) can only result in the values 0, 100, or 200, whereas I=(100*N)/51 properly calculates the desired result.

dual address DMA Direct memory access that requires two bus cycles to transfer data from an input device into memory, or from memory to an output device.

dual port memory A memory module that interfaces to two separate address/data buses, and allows both systems read/write access the data.

duty cycle For a periodic digital wave, it is the percentage of time the signal is high. When an LED display is scanned, it is the percentage of time each LED is active. A motor interfaced using pulse-width-modulation allows the computer to control delivered power by adjusting the duty cycle.

dynamic allocation  Data structures like the TCB that are created at runtime by calling malloc() and exist until the software releases the memory block back to the heap by calling free(). See static allocation.

dynamic RAM Volatile read/write storage built from a capacitor and a single transistor having a low cost, but requiring refresh. Contrast with static RAM.

EEPROM Electrically erasable programmable read only memory that is nonvolatile and easy to reprogram.  EEPROM can be erased and reprogrammed multiple times.

embedded computer system A system that performs a specific dedicated operation where the computer is hidden or embedded inside the machine.  

emulator  An in-circuit emulator is an expensive debugging hardware tool that mimics the processor pin outs. To debug with an emulator, you would remove the processor chip and attach the emulator cable into the processor socket. The emulator would sense the processor input signals and recreate the processor outputs signals on the socket as if an actual processor were actually there, running at full speed. Inside the emulator you have internal read/write access to the registers and processor state. Most emulators allow you to visualize/record strategic information in real-time without halting the program execution. You can also remove ROM chips and insert the connector of a ROM-emulator. This type of emulator is less expensive, and it allows you to debug ROM-based software systems.

EPROM Same as PROM. Electrically programmable read only memory that is nonvolatile and requires external devices to erase and reprogram. It is usually erased using UV light.

erase The process of clearing the information in a PROM or EEPROM, using electricity or UV light. The information bits are usually all set to logic 1.

EVB Evaluation Board, a board-level product used to develop microcontroller systems.

even parity  A communication protocol where the number of ones in the data plus a parity bit is an even number. Contrast with odd parity.

external fragmentation A condition when the largest file or memory block that can be allocated is less than the total amount of free space on the disk or memory.

fan out  The number of inputs that a single output can drive if the devices are all in the same logic family.

Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) A fast technique to convert data in the time domain to data in the frequency domain. N data points are sampled at fs. The resulting frequency resolution is fs /N. Mathematically, the FFT is the same as the DFT, just faster.

FET Field effect transistor, also JFET.

filter In the debugging context, a filter is a Boolean function or conditional test used to make run-time decisions. For example, if we print information only if two variables x,y are equal, then the conditional (x==y) is a filter. Filters can involve hardware status as well.

finite impulse response filter (FIR) A digital filter where the output is a function of a finite number of current and past data samples, but not a function of previous filter outputs.

Finite State Machine (FSM) An abstract design method to build a machine with inputs and outputs. The machine can be in one of a finite number of states. Which state the system is in represents memory of previous inputs. The output and next state are a function of the input. There may be time delays as well.

fixed-point A technique where calculations involving nonintegers are performed using a sequence of integer operations. E.g., 0.123*x is performed in decimal fixed-point as (123*x)/1000 or in binary fixed-point as (126*x)>>10.

flash EEPROM Electrically erasable programmable read only memory that is nonvolatile and easy to reprogram. Flash EEPROMs are typically larger than regular EEPROM.

floating A logic state where the output device does not drive high or pull low. The outputs of open collector and tristate devices can be in the floating state. Same as HiZ.

floor Establishing a lower bound on the result of an operation. See also ceiling.

follower An analog circuit with gain equal to 1, large input impedance and small output impedance. Same as voltage follower.

frame  A complete and distinct packet of bits occurring in a serial communication channel.

frame  The fixed structure in a relay or transducer. Contrast to armature.

framing error An error when the receiver expects a stop bit (1) and the input is 0.

frequency response The frequency at which the gain drops to 0.707 of the normal value. For a low pass system, the frequency response ranges from 0 to a maximum value.  For a high pass system, the frequency response ranges from a minimum value to infinity. For a bandpass system, the frequency response ranges from a minimum to a maximum value. Same as bandwidth.

frequency shift key (FSK) A modem that modulates the digital signals into frequency encoded sine waves.

friendly Friendly software modifies just the bits that need to be modified, leaving the other bits unchanged, making to easier to combine modules.

full duplex channel Hardware that allows bits (information, error checking, synchronization or overhead) to transfer simultaneously in both directions. Contrast with simplex and half duplex channels.

full duplex communication A system that allows information (data, characters) to transfer simultaneously in both directions.

functional debugging  The process of detecting, locating, or correcting functional and logical errors in a program, typically not involving time. The process of instrumenting a program for such purposes is called functional debugging or often simply debugging.

fuzzification Conversion from the crisp inputs to the fuzzy logic input variables.

fuzzy logic Boolean logic (true/false) that can take on a range of values from true (255) to false (0). Fuzzy logic and is calculated as the minimum. Fuzzy logic or is the maximum.

gadfly  A software/hardware synchronization method where the software continuously reads the hardware status waiting for the hardware operation to complete. The software usually performs no work while waiting for the hardware. Same as busy wait.

gauge factor The sensitivity of a strain gauge transducer, i.e., slope of the resistance versus displacement response.

gibibyte (GiB) 230 or 1,073,741,824 bytes. Compare to gigabyte, which is 1,000,000,000 bytes.

half duplex channel Hardware that allows bits (information, error checking, synchronization or overhead) to transfer in both directions, but in only one direction at a time. Contrast with simplex and full duplex channels.

half duplex communication A system that allows information to transfer in both directions, but in only one direction at a time.

halfword  Two bytes containing 16 bits. Same as double byte.

handshake A software/hardware synchronization method where control and status signals go both directions between the transmitter and receiver. The communication is interlocked meaning each device will wait for the other.

hard real-time A system that can guarantee that a process will complete a critical task within a certain specified range. In data acquisition systems, hard real-time means there is an upper bound on the latency between when a sample is supposed to be taken (every 1/fs) and when the ADC is actually started. Hard real-time also implies that no ADC samples are missed.

heartbeat A debugging monitor, such as a flashing LED, we add for the purpose of seeing if our program is running.

hexadecimal  A number system that uses base 16.

HiZ A logic state where the output device does not drive high or pull low. The outputs of open collector and tristate devices can be in the floating state. Same as floating.

hold time  When latching data into a device with a rising or falling edge of a clock, the hold time is the time after the active edge of the clock that the data must continue to be valid. See setup time.

hook An indirect function call added to a software system that allows the user to attach their programs to run at strategic times. These attachments are created at run time and do not require recompiling the entire system.

horizontal parity  A parity calculated across the entire message on a bit by bit basis, e.g., the horizontal parity bit 0 is the parity calculated on all the bit 0’s of the entire message, can be even or odd parity

hysteresis A condition when the output of a system depends not only on the input, but also on the previous outputs, e.g., a transducer that follows a different response curve when the input is increasing than when the input is decreasing.

I/O bound  A situation where the input or output device is slower than the software. In other words it takes longer for the I/O device to process data, than for the software to process data. Contrast to CPU bound.

I/O device Hardware and software components capable of bringing information from the external environment into the computer (input device), or sending data out from the computer to the external environment (output device.)

I/O port  A hardware device that connects the internal software with external hardware.

IEEE488  A medium speed handshaking parallel I/O standard used for desktop instruments.

IIH  Input current when the signal is high.
IIL  Input current when the signal is low.
immediate  An addressing mode where the operand is a fixed data or address value.

impedance loading A condition when the input of stage n+1 of an analog system affects the output of stage n, because the input impedance of stage n+1 is too small and the output impedance of stage n is too large.

impedance The ratio of the effort (voltage, force, pressure) divided by the flow (current, velocity, flow).

incremental control system A control system where the actuator has many possible states, and the system increments or decrements the actuator value depending on either in error is positive or negative.

indexed  An addressing mode where the data or address value for the instruction is located in memory pointed to by an index register.

infinite impulse response filter (IIR) A digital filter where the output is a function of an infinite number of past data samples, usually by making the filter output a function of previous filter outputs.

input bias current Difference between currents of the two op amp inputs.

input capture A mechanism to set a flag and capture the current time (TCNT value) on the rising, falling or rising&falling edge of an external signal. The input capture event can also request an interrupt.

input impedance Input voltage divided by input current.

input noise current Current noise refereed to the op amp inputs.

input noise voltage Voltage noise refereed to the op amp inputs.

input offset current Average current into the two op amp inputs.

input offset voltage Voltage difference between the two op amp inputs that makes the output zero.

instruction register (IR) Register in the control unit that contains the op code for the current instruction.

instrument  An instrument is the code injected into a program for debugging or profiling.  This code is usually extraneous to the normal function of a program and may be temporary or permanent.  Instruments injected during interactive sessions are considered to be temporary because these instruments can be removed simply by terminating a session.  Instruments injected in source code are considered to be permanent because removal requires editing and recompiling the source. An example of a temporary instrument occurs when the debugger replaces a regular op code with a breakpoint instruction. This temporary instrument can be removed dynamically by restoring the original op code. A print statement added to your source code is an example of a permanent instrument, because removal requires editing and recompiling.

instrument An embedded system that collects information, same as data acquisition system.

instrumentation  The debugging process of injecting or inserting an instrument.

instrumentation amp A differential amplifier analog circuit, which can have large gain, large input impedance, small output impedance, and a good common mode rejection ration.

internal fragmentation Storage that is allocated for the convenience of the operating system but contains no information. This space is wasted.

interrupt  A software/hardware synchronization method where the hardware causes a special software program (interrupt handler) to execute when its operation to complete. The software usually can perform other work while waiting for the hardware.

interrupt flag A status bit that is set by the timer hardware to signify an external event has occurred.

interrupt mask A control bit that, if programmed to 1, will cause an interrupt request when the associated flag is set. Same as arm.

interrupt service routine (ISR) Program that runs as a result of an interrupt.

interrupt vector 32-bit values in ROM specifying where the software should execute after an interrupt request. There is a unique interrupt vector for each type of interrupt including reset.

intrusive The debugger itself affects the program being tested.   See nonintrusive.

Inverse Discrete Fourier Transform (IDFT) A technique to convert data in the frequency domain to data in the time domain. If there are N data points and the sampling rate is fs, the resulting frequency resolution will be fs /N.

invocation coupling Module A is connected to Module B, because A calls B.

IOH  Output current when the signal is high. This is the maximum current that has a voltage above VOH.  
IOL  Output current when the signal is low. This is the maximum current that has a voltage below VOL.
isolated I/O A configuration where the I/O devices are interfaced to the computer in a manner different than the way memories are connected, from an interfacing perspective I/O devices and memory modules have separate bus signals, from a programmer’s point of view the I/O devices have their own I/O address map separate from the memory map, and I/O device access requires the use of special I/O instructions

jerk  The change in acceleration; the derivative of the acceleration.

Johnson noise A fundamental noise in resistive devices arising from the uncertainty about the position and velocity of individual molecules. Same as thermal noise and white noise.

Karnaugh map tabular representation of the input/output relationship for a combinational digital function, the inputs possibilities are placed in the row and column labels, and the output values are placed inside the table

kibibyte (KiB) 210 or 1024 bytes. Compare to kilobyte, which is 1000 bytes.

latch As a noun, it means a register. As a verb, it means to store data into the register.

latched input port  An input port where the signals are latched (saved) on an edge of an associated strobe signal.

latency  In this book latency usually refers to the response time of the computer to external events. For example, the time between new input becoming available and the time the input is read by the computer. For example, the time between an output device becoming idle and the time the input is the computer writes new data to it. There can also be latency for an I/O device, which is the response time of the external I/O device hardware to a software command.

LCD  Liquid Crystal Display, where the computer controls the reflectance or transmittance of the liquid crystal, characterized by its flexible display patterns, low power, and slow speed.

LED  Light Emitting Diode, where the computer controls the electrical power to the diode, characterized by its simple display patterns, medium power, and high speed.

light-weight process  Same as a thread. 

linear filter A filter where the output is a linear combination of its inputs.

linear recursion A recursive technique that makes only one call to itself during the execution of the function. Linear recursive functions are easier to implement iteratively. We draw the execution pattern as a straight or linear path. See also recursion, binary recursion, and tail recursion.

linear variable differential transformer (LVDT) A transducer that converts position into electric voltage.

little endian Mechanism for storing multiple byte numbers such that the least significant byte exists first (in the smallest memory address). Contrast with big endian.

loader  System software that places the object code into the microcontroller’s memory. If the object code is stored in EPROM, the loader is also called a EPROM programmer.

Local Area Network (LAN) A connection between computers confined to a small space, such as a room or a building.

logic analyzer  A hardware debugging tool that allows you to visualize many digital logic signals versus time. Real logic analyzers have at least 32 channels and can have up to 200 channels, with sophisticated techniques for triggering, saving and analyzing the real-time data. In TExaS, logic analyzers have only 8 channels and simply plot digital signals versus time.

LSB  The least significant bit in a number system is the bit with the smallest significance, usually the right-most bit. With signed or unsigned integers the significance of the LSB is 1.

maintenance  Process of verifying, changing, correcting, enhancing, and extending a system.

make before break in a double-throw relay or double-throw switch, there is one common contact and two separate contacts. Make before break means as the common contact moves from one of separate contacts to another, it will make (finishing bouncing) the second contact before it breaks off (start bouncing) the first contact. A form D relay has a make before break operation.

mailbox A formal communication structure, similar to a FIFO queue, where the source task puts data into the mailbox and the sink task gets data from the mailbox. The mailbox can hold at most one piece of data at a time, and has two states: mailbox has valid data or mailbox is empty.

mark A digital value of true or logic 1. Contrast with space.

mask  As a verb, mask is the operation that selects certain bits out of many bits, using the logical and operation. The bits that are not being selected will be cleared to zero. When used as a noun, mask refers to the specific bits that are being selected.

Mealy FSM A FSM where the both the output and next state are a function of the input and state

measurand A signal measured by a data acquisition system.

mebibyte (MiB) 220 or 1,048,576 bytes. Compare to megabyte, which is 1,000,000 bytes.

membership sets Fuzzy logic variables that can take on a range of values from true (255) to false (0).

memory A computer component capable of storing and recalling information.

memory-mapped I/O A configuration where the I/O devices are interfaced to the computer in a manner identical to the way memories are connected, from an interfacing perspective I/O devices and memory modules shares the same bus signals, from a programmer’s point of view the I/O devices exist as locations in the memory map, and I/O device access can be performed using any of the memory access instructions.

microcomputer A small electronic device capable of performing input/output functions containing a microprocessor, memory, and I/O devices, where small means you can carry it.

microcontroller A single chip microcomputer like the TI MSP430, Freescale 9S12, Intel 8051, PIC16, or the Texas Instruments LM3S1968.

mnemonic The symbolic name of an operation code, like mov str push.

modem An electronic device that MOdulates and DEModulates a communication signal. Used in serial communication across telephone lines.

monitor or debugger window  A monitor is a debugger feature that allows us to passively view strategic software parameters during the real-time execution of our program. An effective monitor is one that has minimal effect on the performance of the system. When debugging software on a windows-based machine, we can often set up a debugger window that displays the current value of certain software variables.

Moore FSM A FSM where the both the output is only a function of the state and the next state is a function of the input and state

MOSFET Metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor.

MSB The most significant bit in a number system is the bit with the greatest significance, usually the left-most bit. If the number system is signed, then the MSB signifies positive (0) or negative (1).

multiple access circular queue MACQ A data structure used in data acquisition systems to hold the current sample and a finite number of previous samples.

multithreaded  A system with multiple threads (e.g., main program and interrupt service routines) that cooperate towards a common overall goal. 

mutual exclusion or mutex  Thread synchronization where at most one thread at a time is allowed to enter. 

negative feedback An analog system with negative gain feedback paths. These systems are often stable.

negative logic A signal where the true value has a lower voltage than the false value, in digital logic true is 0 and false is 1, in TTL logic true is less than 0.7 volts and false is greater than 2 volts, in RS232 protocol true is -12 volts and false is +12 volts. Contrast with positive logic.

nibble  4 binary bits or 1 hexadecimal digit.

nonatomic  Software execution that can be divided or interrupted. Most lines of C code require multiple assembly language instructions to execute, therefore an interrupt may occur in the middle of a line of C code. The instructions store and load multiple, STM LDM, are nonatomic.

nonintrusive A characteristic when the presence of the collection of information itself does not affect the parameters being measured.   Nonintrusiveness is the characteristic or quality of a debugger that allows the software/hardware system to operate normally as if the debugger did not exist. Intrusiveness is used as a measure of the degree of perturbation caused in program performance by an instrument. For example, a print statement added to your source code and single-stepping are very intrusive because they significantly affect the real-time interaction of the hardware and software. When a program interacts with real-time events, the performance is significantly altered. On the other hand, an instrument that toggles an LED on and off (requiring less than a 1 µs to execute) is much less intrusive. A logic analyzer that passively monitors the address and data by is completely nonintrusive.  An in-circuit emulator is also non-intrusive because the software input/output relationships will be the same with and without the debugging tool.

nonlinear filter A filter where the output is not a linear combination of its inputs. E.g., median, minimum, maximum are examples of nonlinear filters. Contrast to linear filter.

nonpreemptive scheduler  A scheduler that cannot suspend execution of a thread without the thread's permission. The thread must cooperate and suspend itself. Same as cooperative multi-tasking.

nonreentrant  A software module which once started by one thread, should not be interrupted and executed by a second thread. A nonreentrant modules usually involve nonatomic accesses to global variables or I/O ports: read modify write, write followed by read, or a multistep write.

nonvolatile A condition where information is not lost when power is removed. When power is restored, then the information is in the state that occurred when the power was removed.

Nyquist Theorem If a input signal is captured by an ADC at the regular rate of fs samples/sec, then the digital sequence can accurately represent the 0 to ½ fs frequency components of the original signal.

object code  Programs in machine readable format created by the compiler or assembler.

odd parity A communication protocol where the number of ones in the data plus a parity bit is an odd number. Contrast with even parity.

op amp An integrated analog component with two inputs, (V2,V1) and an output (Vout), where Vout=K•(V2-V1). The amp has a very large gain, K. Same as operational amplifier.

op code, opcode, or operation code A specific instruction executed by the computer. The op code along with the operand completely specifies the function to be performed. In assembly language programming, the op code is represented by its mnemonic, like MOV. During execution, the op code is stored as a machine code loaded in memory.

open collector  A digital logic output that has two states low and HiZ. Same as open drain and wire-or-mode.

open drain  A digital logic output that has two states low and HiZ. Same as open collector and wire-or-mode.

open loop control system A control system that does not include sensors to measure the current state variables. An analog system with no feedback paths.

operand The second part of an instruction that specifies either the data or the address for that instruction. An assembly instruction typically has an op code (e.g., MOV) and an operand (e.g., R0,#55). Instructions that use inherent addressing mode have no operand field.

operating system System software for managing computer resources and facilitating common functions like input/output, memory management, and file system.

originate modem the device that places the telephone call.

oscilloscope  A hardware debugging tool that allows you to visualize one or two analog signals versus time.

output compare A mechanism to cause a flag to be set and an output pin to change when the timer matches a preset value. The output compare event can also request an interrupt.

output impedance Open circuit output voltage divided by short circuit output current.

overflow An error that occurs when the result of a calculation exceeds the range of the number system. For example, with 8-bit unsigned integers, 200+57 will yield the incorrect result of 1.

overrun error An error that occurs when the receiver gets a new frame but the receive FIFO and shift register already have information.

paged memory  A memory organization where logical addresses (used by software) have multiple and distinct components or fields. The number of bits in the least significant field defines the page size. The physical memory is usually continuous having sequential addresses. There is a dynamic address translation (logical to physical).

parallel port  A port where all signals are available simultaneously. In this book the ports are 8 bits wide.

parallel programming A software system that supports two or more programs being executed at the same time. A computer with multiple cores implements parallel programming.

partially asynchronous bus  a communication protocol that has a central clock but the memory module can dynamically extend the length of a bus cycle (cycle stretch) if it needs more time

path expression A software technique to guarantee subfunctions within a module are executed in a proper sequence. For example, it forces the user to initialize I/O device before attempting to perform I/O.

PC-relative addressing An addressing mode where the effective address is calculated by its position relative to the current value of the program counter.

performance debugging or profiling  The process of acquiring or modifying timing characteristics and execution patterns of a program and the process of instrumenting a program for such purposes is called performance debugging or profiling.

periodic polling  A software/hardware synchronization method that is a combination of interrupts and busy wait. An interrupt occurs at a regular rate (periodic) independent of the hardware status. The interrupt handler checks the hardware device (polls) to determine if its operation is complete. The software usually can perform other work while waiting for the hardware.

Personal Area Network (PAN) A connection between computers controlled by a single person or all working toward for a well-defined single task.

phase shift key (PSK) a protocol that encodes the information as phase changes between the sounds.

photosensor A transducer that converts reflected or transmitted light into electric current.

physical plant The physical device being controlled.

PID controller A control system where the actuator output depends on a linear combination of the current error (P), the integral of the error (I) and the derivative of the error (D).

pink noise A fundamental noise in resistive devices arising from fluctuating conductivity. Same as 1/f noise.

pole A place in the frequency domain where the filter gain is infinite.

polling A software function to look and see which of the potential sources requested the interrupt.

port  External pins through which the microcontroller can perform input/output. Same as I/O port.

positive feedback An analog system with positive gain feedback paths. These systems will saturate.

positive logic a signal where the true value has a higher voltage than the false value, in digital logic true is 1 and false is 0, in TTL logic true is greater than 2 volts and false is less than 0.7 volts, in RS232 protocol true is +12 volts and false is -12 volts. Contrast with negative logic.

potentiometer A transducer that converts position into electric resistance.

precision A term specifying the degrees of freedom from random errors. For an input signal, it is the number of distinguishable input signals that can be reliably detected by the measurement. For an output signal, it is the number of different output parameters that can be produced by the system. For a number system, precision is the number of distinct or different values of a number system in units of “alternatives”. The precision of a number system is also the number of binary digits required to represent all its numbers in units of “bits”.

preemptive scheduler  A scheduler that has the power to suspend execution of a thread without the thread's permission.

priority  When two requests for service are made simultaneously, priority determines which order to process them.

private  Can be accessed only by software modules in that local group.

private variable A global variable that is used by a single thread, and not shared with other threads.

process  The execution of software that does not necessarily cooperate with other processes. 

producer-consumer A multithreaded system where the producers generate new data, and the consumers process or output the data.

profiling  See performance debugging. 

program counter (PC) A register in the processor that points to the memory containing the instruction to execute next.

PROM Same as EPROM. Programmable read only memory that is nonvolatile and requires external devices to erase and reprogram. It is usually erased using UV light.

promotion Increasing the precision of a number for convenience or to avoid overflow errors during calculations.

pseudo interrupt vector A secondary place for the interrupt vectors for the convenience of the debugger, because the debugger cannot or does not want the user to modify the real interrupt vectors. They provide flexibility for debugging but incur a run time delay during execution.

pseudo op Operations included in the program that are not executed by the computer at run time, but rather are interpreted by the assembler during the assembly process. Same as assembly directive.

pseudo-code A shorthand for describing a software algorithm. The exact format is not defined, but many programmers use their favorite high-level language syntax (like C) without paying rigorous attention to the punctuation.

public  Can be accessed by any software module.

public variable A global variable that is shared by multiple programs or threads.

pulse width modulation A technique to deliver a variable signal (voltage, power, energy) using an on/off signal with a variable percentage of time the signal is on (duty cycle). Same as variable duty cycle.

Q The Q of a bandpass filter (passes fmin to fmax) is the center pass frequency (fo=(fmax+fmin)/2) divided by the width of the pass region, Q=fo/(fmax-fmin). The Q of a bandreject filter (rejects fmin to fmax) is the center reject frequency (fo=(fmax+fmin)/2) divided by the width of the reject region, Q=fo/(fmax-fmin).

quadrature amplitude modem (QAM) a protocol that used both the phase and amplitude to encode up to 6 bits onto each baud.

qualitative DAS A DAS that collects information not in the form of numerical values, but rather in the form of the qualitative senses, e.g., sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch. A qualitative DAS may also detect the presence or absence of conditions.

quantitative DAS A DAS that collects information in the form of numerical values.

RAM Random Access Memory, a type of memory where is the information can be stored and retrieved easily and quickly. Since it is volatile the information is lost when power is removed.

range Includes both the smallest possible and the largest possible signal (input or output). The difference between the largest and smallest input that can be measured by the instrument. The units are in the units of the measurand. When precision is in alternatives, range=precision•resolution.  Same as span

read cycle data flows from the memory or input device to the processor, the address bus specifies the memory or input device location and the data bus contains the information at that address

read data available The time interval (start,end) during which the data will be valid during a read cycle, determined by the memory module

real-time A characteristic of a system that can guarantee an upper bound (worst case) on latency.

real-time system A system where time-critical operations occur when needed.

recursion A programming technique where a function calls itself.

reduced instruction set computer (RISC) A computer with a few instructions, instructions with fixed lengths, instructions that execute in 1 or 2 bus cycles, only load and store can access memory, no one instruction can both read and write memory, many identical general purpose registers, and a limited number of addressing modes.  Contrast to CISC.

reentrant  A software module that can be started by one thread, interrupted and executed by a second thread. A reentrant module allow both threads to properly execute the desired function.  Contrast with non-reentrant.

registers High-speed memory located in the processor. The registers in the ARM® Cortex™-M include R0 through R15.

relay  A mechanical switch that can be turned on and off by the computer.

reliability  The ability of a system to operate within specified parameters for a stated period of time. Given in terms of mean time between failures (MTBF).

reproducibility (or repeatability) A parameter specifying how consistent over time the measurement is when the input remains fixed.

requirements document A formal description of what the system will do in a very complete way, but not including how it will be done. It should be unambiguous, complete, verifiable, and modifiable.

reset vector The 32-bit value at memory locations 0x0000.0004 specifying where the software should start after power is turned on or after a hardware reset.

resistance temperature device (RTD) A linear transducer that converts temperature into electric resistance.

resolution For an input signal, it is the smallest change in the input parameter that can be reliably detected by the measurement. For an output signal, it is the smallest change in the output parameter that can be produced by the system, range equals precision times resolution.  The units are in the units of the measurand. When precision is in alternatives, range=precision•resolution.

response time  Similar to latency, it is the delay between when the time an event occurs and the time the software responds to the event.

ritual  Software, usually executed once at the beginning of the program, that defines the operational modes of the I/O ports.

ROM Read Only Memory, a type of memory where is the information is programmed into the device once, but can be accessed quickly. It is low cost, must be purchased in high volume and can be programmed only once. See also EPROM, EEPROM, and flash EEPROM.

rotor The part of a motor that rotates.

round robin scheduler  A scheduler that runs each active thread equally.

roundoff The error that occurs in a fixed-point or floating-point calculation when the least significant bits of an intermediate calculation are discarded so the result can fit into the finite precision.

RTD Resistance temperature device, a sensor used to measure temperature, usually made from platinum

sample and hold A circuit used to latch a rapidly changing analog signal, capturing its input value and holding its output constant.

sampling rate The rate at which data is collected in a data acquisition system.

saturation A device that is no longer sensitive to its inputs when its input goes above a maximum value or below a minimum value.

scan or scanpoint  Any instrument used to produce a side effect without causing a break (halt) is a scan.  Therefore, a scan may be used to gather data passively or to modify functions of a program. Examples include software added to your source code that simply outputs or modifies a global variable without halting. A scanpoint is triggered in a manner similar to a breakpoint but a scanpoint simply records data at that time without halting execution.

scheduler  System software that suspends and launches threads.

Schmitt Trigger  A digital interface with hysteresis making it less susceptible to noise.

scope  A logic analyzer or an oscilloscope, hardware debugging tools that allows you to visualize multiple digital or analog signals versus time.

SCSI  Small Computer Systems Interface, a high speed handshaking parallel I/O standard.

select signal The output of the address decoder (each module on the bus has a separate address decoder); a Boolean (true/false) signal specifying whether or not the current address of the bus matches the device address

semaphore A system function with two operations (wait and signal) that provide for thread synchronization and resource sharing.

sensitivity The sensitivity of a transducer is the slope of the output versus input response. The sensitivity of a qualitative DAS that detects events is the percentage of actual events that are properly recognized by the system.

serial communication A process where information is transmitted one bit at a time.

serial peripheral interface (SPI) A device to transmit data with synchronous serial communication protocol. Same as SSI.

serial port An I/O port with which the bits are input or output one at a time.

servo A DC motor with built in controller. The microcontroller specifies desired position and the servo adds/subtracts power to move the shaft to that position.

setup time When latching data into a register with a clock, it is the time before an edge the input must be valid. Contrast with hold time.

shot noise A fundamental noise that occurs in devices that count discrete events.

signed two’s complement binary A mechanism to represent signed integers where 1 followed by all 0’s is the most negative number, all 1’s represents the value -1, all 0’s represents the value 0, and 0 followed by all 1’s is the largest positive number.

sign-magnitude binary A mechanism to represent signed integers where the most significant bit is set if the number is negative, and the remaining bits represent the magnitude as an unsigned binary.

simplex channel Hardware that allows bits (information, error checking, synchronization or overhead) to transfer only in one direction. Contrast with half duplex and full duplex channels.

simplex communication A system that allows information to transfer only in one direction.

simulator  A simulator is a software application that simulates or mimics the operation of a processor or computer system. Most simulators recreate only simple I/O ports and often do not effectively duplicate the real-time interactions of the software/hardware interface. On the other hand, they do provide a simple and interactive mechanism to test software. Simulators are especially useful when learning a new language, because they provide more control and access to the simulated machine, than one normally has with real hardware.

single address DMA Direct memory access that requires only one bus cycle to transfer data from an input device into memory, or from memory to an output device.

single cycle DMA An I/O synchronization scheme that transfers data one item at a time directly from an input device into memory, or directly from memory to an output device. Same as cycle steal DMA.

single-pole relay A simple relay with only one copy of the switch mechanism. Contrast with double pole.

single-pole switch A simple switch with only one copy of the switch mechanism. One switch that acts independent from other switches in the system. Contrast with double-pole.

single-throw switch A switch with two contact connections. The two contacts may be connected or disconnected.  Contrast with double-throw.

slew rate The maximum slope of a signal. If the time-varying signal V(t) is in volts, the slew rate is the maximum dV/dt in volts/s.

software interrupt A software interrupt is similar to a regular or hardware interrupt: there is a trigger that invokes the execution of an ISR. On the CortexTM-M, there are two software interrupts: supervisor call and PendSV (vectors at 0x00000028 and 0x00000038 respectively). The difference between hardware and software interrupts is the trigger. Hardware interrupts are triggered by hardware events, while software interrupts are triggered explicitly by software. For example to invoke a PendSV, the software sets bit 28 of the NVIC_INT_CTRL_R register. Same as trap.

software maintenance Process of verifying, changing, correcting, enhancing, and extending software.

solenoid  A discrete motion device (on/off) that can be controlled by the computer usually by activating an electromagnet. For example, electronic door locks on automobiles.

source code  Programs in human readable format created with an editor.

space A digital value of false or logic 0. Contrast with mark.

span  Same as range.

spatial resolution The volume over which the DAS collects information about the measurand.

specificity The specificity of a transducer is the relative sensitivity of the device to the signal of interest versus the sensitivity of the device to other unwanted signals. The sensitivity of a qualitative DAS that detects events is the percentage of events detected by the system that are actually true events.

spinlock semaphore  A semaphore where the threads will spin (run but do no useful function) when they execute wait on a busy semaphore. Contrast to blocking semaphore.

stabilize  The debugging process of stabilizing a software system involves specifying all its inputs. When a system is stabilized, the output results are consistently repeatable. Stabilizing a system with multiple real-time events, like input devices and time-dependent conditions, can be difficult to accomplish. It often involves replacing input hardware with sequential reads from an array or disk file.

stack Last in first out data structure located in RAM and used to temporarily save information.

stack pointer (SP) A register in the processor that points to the RAM location of the stack.

start bit An overhead bit(s) specifying the beginning of the frame, used in serial communication to synchronize the receiver shift register with the transmitter clock.  See also stop bit, even parity and odd parity.

starvation  A condition that occurs with a priority scheduler where low priority threads are never run.

static allocation  Data structures such as an FSM or TCB that are defined at assembly or compile time and exist throughout the life of the software. Contrast to dynamic allocation.

static RAM Volatile read/write storage built from three transistors having fast speed, and not requiring refresh. Contrast with dynamic RAM.

stator The part of a motor that remains stationary. Same as frame.

stepper motor  A motor that moves in discrete steps.

stop bit  An overhead bit(s) specifying the end of the frame, used in serial communication to separate one frame from the next. See also start bit, even parity and odd parity.

strain gauge A transducer that converts displacement into electric resistance. It can also be used to measure force or pressure.

string A sequence of ASCII characters, usually terminated with a zero.

symbol table A mapping from a symbolic name to its corresponding 16-bit address, generated by the assembler in pass one and displayed in the listing file.

synchronous bus a communication protocol that has a central clock; there is no feedback from the memory to the processor, so every memory cycle takes exactly the same time; data transfers (put data on bus, take data off bus) are synchronized to the central clock

synchronous protocol a system where the two devices share the same clock.

synchronous serial interface (SSI) A device to transmit data with synchronous serial communication protocol. Same as SPI.

tachometer a sensor that measures the revolutions per second of a rotating shaft.

tail recursion A technique where the recursive call occurs as the last action taken by the function. See also recursion, binary recursion, and linear recursion.

thermal noise A fundamental noise in resistive devices arising from the uncertainty about the position and velocity of individual molecules. Same as Johnson noise and white noise.

thermistor A nonlinear transducer that converts temperature into electric resistance.

thermocouple A transducer that converts temperature into electric voltage.

thread  The execution of software that cooperates with other threads. A thread embodies the action of the software. One concept describes a thread as the sequence of operations including the input and output data.

thread control block TCB  Information about each thread. 

three-pole relay Three separate and complete relays, which are activated together (see single pole).

three-pole switch  Three separate and complete switches. The switches are electrically separate, but mechanically connected. The three switches turned on and off together (see single pole).

throughput  The information transfer rate, the amount of data transferred per second. Same as bandwidth.

time constant The time to reach 63.2% of the final output after the input is instantaneously increased.

time profile and execution profile  Time profile refers to the timing characteristic of a program and execution profile refers to the execution pattern of a program.

timing signals The lines used to clock data onto or off of the bus; signals that specify when to activate during this cycle; the specific times for the rise and fall edges are synchronized to the E clock. Contrast to command signals.

tolerance  The maximum deviation of a parameter from a specified value.

total harmonic distortion (THD) A measure of the harmonic distortion present and is defined as the ratio of the sum of the powers of all harmonic components to the power of the fundamental frequency.

transducer A device that converts one type of signal into another type.

trap A trap is similar to a regular or hardware interrupt: there is a trigger that invokes the execution of an ISR. On the CortexTM-M, there are two software interrupts: supervisor call and PendSV (vectors at 0x00000028 and 0x00000038 respectively). The difference between hardware and software interrupts is the trigger. Hardware interrupts are triggered by hardware events, while software interrupts are triggered explicitly by software. For example to invoke a PendSV, the software sets bit 28 of the NVIC_INT_CTRL_R register. Same as software interrupt.

tristate  The state of a tristate logic output when off or not driven.

tristate logic  A digital logic device that has three output states low, high, and off (HiZ).

truncation The act of discarding bits as a number is converted from one format to another.

two’s complement A number system used to define signed integers. The MSB defines whether the number is negative (1) or positive (0). To negate a two’s complement number, one first complements (flip from 0 to 1 or from 1 to 0) each bit, then add 1 to the number.

two-pole relay two separate and complete relays, which are activated together (same as double pole).

two-pole switch Two separate and complete switches. The switches are electrically separate, but mechanically connected. The two switches turned on and off together which are activated together, same as double-pole.

ultrasound A sound with a frequency too high to be heard by humans, typically 40 kHz to 100 MHz.

unbuffered I/O  The hardware and software are tightly coupled so that both wait for each other during the transmission of data.

unipolar stepper motor A stepper motor where the current flows in only one direction (on/off) along the interface wires; a stepper with 5 or 6 interface wires.

universal asynchronous receiver/transmitter (UART) A device to transmit data with asynchronous serial communication protocol, same as ACIA.

unsigned binary A mechanism to represent unsigned integers where all 0’s represents the value 0, and all 1’s represents is the largest positive number.

vector A 32-bit address in ROM containing the location of the interrupt service routines. See also reset vector and interrupt vector.

velocity factor (VF) The ratio of the speed at which information travels relative to the speed of light.

vertical parity  the normal parity bit calculated on each individual frame, can be even or odd parity

VOH  The smallest possible output voltage when the signal is high, and the current is less than IOH.
VOL  The largest possible output voltage when the signal is low, and the current is less than IOL.
volatile A condition where information is lost when power is removed.

volatile A property of a variable in C, such that the value of the variable can change outside the immediate scope of the software accessing the variable.

voltage follower An analog circuit with gain equal to 1, large input impedance and small output impedance. Same as follower.

vulnerable window  Locations within a software module, which if an interrupt were to occur at one of these locations, then an error could occur (e.g., data lost, corrupted data, program crash, etc.)  Same as critical section.

white noise A fundamental noise in resistive devices arising from the uncertainty about the position and velocity of individual molecules. Same as Johnson noise and thermal noise.

wire-or-mode A digital logic output that has two states low and HiZ. Same as open collector.

word Four bytes containing 32 bits.

workstation A powerful general purpose computer system having a price in the $3K to 50K range and used for handling large amounts of data and performing many calculations.

write cycle data is sent from the processor to the memory or output device, the address bus specifies the memory or output device location and the data bus contains the information

write data available time interval (start,end) during which the data will be valid during a write cycle, determined by the processor

write data required  time interval (start,end) during which the data should be valid during a write cycle, determined by the memory module

XON/XOFF A protocol used by printers to feedback the printer status to the computer. XOFF is sent from the printer to the computer in order to stop data transfer, and XON is sent from the printer to the computer in order to resume data transfer.

Z Transform A transform equation converting a digital time-domain sequence into the frequency domain. In both the time and frequency domain it is assumed the signal is band limited to 0 to ½fs.

zero A place in the frequency domain where the filter gain is zero.